---
author: muju
title: "Wake on LAN for Proxmox Node"
description: "A simple guide to setting up Wake-on-LAN on a Proxmox node"
categories: ["Virtualization"]
image:
  path: /assets/vm/proxmox/wol/wol.webp
  lqip: data:image/webp;base64,
#toc: false
---

This guide explains how to set up your Proxmox node to respond to Wake-on-LAN (WoL) messages, allowing you to start your server remotely using a "magic packet."

## installing tools 

First, you'll need to install the required tool ethtool on your Proxmox node. Open a terminal or go to your node's shell and run:

```bash
❯ sudo apt install ethtool
```

Get your interface name

```bash
❯ ip a s
```

The output will list all your network interfaces. In this case, we're looking for an interface that's currently in use. For example:

```bash
eno1: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc mq master vmbr0 state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether XXXXXXXXXXX brd XXXXXXXXXXX
    altname enp1s0f0
```

Here, `eno1` is the name of the network interface.

## Check If Wake-on-LAN is Enabled

Before enabling Wake-on-LAN, it's a good idea to check if it is already active on your interface. Run:
```bash
❯ ethtool eno1 | grep Wake-on
```

The output will look like this:
```bash
        Supports Wake-on: pumbg
        Wake-on: d
```

In this example, Wake-on-LAN is disabled (`d` stands for "disabled"). We will enable it.

## Enable wake-on-lan

To enable the wake on lan we use the ethool and specify the insterface on which we want to enable it

```bash
❯ ethtool -s eno1 wol g
```

## Updating the Network Interfaces File

To make sure that Wake-on-LAN stays enabled after a reboot, we need to add this configuration to the network interfaces file. Open the file using:

```bash
❯ nano /etc/network/interfaces
```

Look for your interface (in our case `eno1`) and add the following line below the `iface` configuration:

```bash
post-up /usr/sbin/ethtool -s enp6s0 wol g
```

The section for `eno1` should now look something like this:

```
auto eno1
  iface eno1 inet manual
  post-up /usr/sbin/ethtool -s eno1 wol g
```

This ensures that WoL will remain enabled after reboots.

## Reload Proxmox Network Settings

To apply the changes, reload the network configuration from the Proxmox GUI. Go to your Proxmox node, then navigate to System > Network. Find your WoL-enabled interface (eno1), click "Edit," and add the "Autostart" flag. Save the changes.

## Testing Wake-on-LAN

Now that the configuration is set, you can test it. Turn off your Proxmox node and use a WoL tool to send a magic packet to the node’s network interface. I’m using the built-in WoL feature in [ipfire]({% post_url 2024-09-22-ipfire %}){:target="_blank"} to send the magic packet.

If your Proxmox node powers up, the Wake-on-LAN setup is complete and working correctly.
